Hello everybody, welcome to today's talk. So this is week nine talk two on
computer systems and networks on the H dip in computer science. Thanks very much if you're joining me here on the
live stream as usual if you're out there. Uh if you could give me a thumbs up on Slack just to make sure
transmission is going okay that you can hear me and that you can see me all right. um that'll be great if if
anybody's out there. So um for today's lecture, what we are going to do is
we're going to look um a little bit around running Python on a Linux or an
embedded Linux device like the Raspberry Pi. Just looking at some features that we introduced I started talking about uh
in the first part of the week there in the lab. uh things like service management with systemd. We're going to
look at process insights like using PS and environment configuration and how
that kind of affects kind of create and Python programs that run on
your Raspberry Pi and that you want to connect and you they're running on a a kind of a small device and how you want
to connect how you can use them to connect to other things. So look um I'm just going to bring up this the website
there just to kind of show you where we're at. Um, yep. So, I'm just going to
flip over on to the left screen here. So, as you see, we are in week our topic
nine here. Um, in week nine. And if I scroll down, this is where we're at at the at unit two here in uh week nine and
that's in let me just go out here. We're so we're in application layer and we're right down here. So, we're going to go
through service management. We're going to talk about something as well called MQTT today. I'm going to have a bit of
fun with that and then we're going to if we have time move on to talk about IoT platforms. So that's the plan for today.
Um so without further ado uh what I'll do is let's just talk about Python for
embedded Linux devices. So this is kind of bringing in some of the Linux stuff you would have done with Caroline as
well. And it's just a little bit about rolling with Python and writing Python
applications that you want on want to run on a Raspberry Pi and that you might want to run automatically when you start
the Pi up. Right? So we're going to talk about service management, looking at processes on the Raspberry Pi, and also
looking about how you can configure environment variables via Python on the Raspberry Pi as well. Okay. So
everything we're going to talk about now right we're using Raspberry Pi here in this part part of the of the of the module.
However, everything I'm talking about here is applicable in general to Linux, right? So it's kind of um it's
transferable. Okay. So let's talk a little bit about service management on
the Raspberry Pi and I want to talk about system D now. So in the last lab I gave you the last step of it was to run
your Python program. You created a Python and web API using Flask and you wanted it so that it would run
automatically as soon as you started up the Raspberry Pi. So we can use systemd to do that, right? So when your Pi boots
up, system D is what manages that startup process and it's the
initialization system, right? uh used by Raspberry Pi OS and it's used to start,
stop and manage processes and services that run on your Raspberry Pi in the
background. Right? So there's already a bunch of systemd processes on your Raspberry Pi tipping away there.
However, um we can create our own and you would have saw that in the last lab, right? Um, and if you want to kind of
think about how systemd works and what it does, um, if you think about uh,
systemd in terms of a conductor in an orchestra, a conductor for a Linux
orchestra, members of the orchestra are all the different processes and services that are running on the OS, right? So,
it kicks off uh, services at boot time. So when you boot up your Raspberry Pi and your Pi takes a little bit of time
to start up and that green light is flashing, system D is working away there in the background starting services
connect to your network and things like that. The other thing system D does it you can you can configure sort of it
just makes sure that everything starts in the right order. Come back to that in a minute. Right. Um some services you
want to start after other services started. They might be dependent on other services. So you got to start one
service first and before you start another service. We'll give you an example of that in a minute. Right.
The other thing systemd can do which is really cool is that it can restart a service if it crashes. That's what I
really like about it. So if I write a program and we know that programs can crash every now and then system D uh
will restart a service if it does crash. So that's kind of nice to do, right? and
allows manual control using uh systemct ctrl system control right which we'll
look at some of those commands now so that's systemd so think of it as a conductor of the Linux orchestra of all
the services that make your OS work and and work in harmony okay
so why is it you why are we talking about it we're doing Python here um a little bit of Python we're program the
Raspberry Pi to do stuff so why is it useful to Python right so if you've written and you've seen this if you've
done the class lab, you'll know what I'm talking about here. If you've written a Python app like an API or a sensor
collector that collects data, you can use systemd to automatically start that
API or process when the Pi boots up, right? And keep it running without a
user logging in, without having to secure shell into the thing and start the app the the program. System D will
do that automatically for you, right? Um, even better if the thing fails,
right? or it fails to start up the first time, you can get it to retry and retry and keep trying to start that process.
It might be the case that some dependency isn't available yet, either
on or off the device, so that it might fail. So, it'll keep trying the process until it starts up, right? Um, so that's
what systemd that's why it's useful for Python apps. And I'd like to say it's not we're looking at in the context of
writing Python programs and running them on a Raspberry Pi, but it's not just Python programs. I can get systemd to
run any executable. Right? So even do you know the stuff you were doing with Caroline like bash scripts and things
like that. You can write systemd services that kick off bash scripts if you want. Right? Um so it's not just
Python files. It can be any executable file. Any executable file, right?
Written in any particular language. Once it's executable on the Pi, you can get you can wrap that up in a systemd
service, right? And to get it to run automatically in the background, right?
So again to kind of highlight that the example there is that that API you wrote. So I wrote an API in the last lab
we created this API that exposes and allows us to control the Raspberry Pi
over HTTP. Now, I don't want to have to stop and start that manually every time. It might be the case that, right, I have
my API there. I want that API to start anytime I just turn on my Raspberry Pi. I plug it in. I want that API to be
available. And I wanted to be able to get sensor data from it like the temperature and access it that way. And
I also want to be able to switch the LEDs on and off by sending in a HTTP
request, right? So, I can do systemd does that for us automatically. I don't have to stop and start it and secure
shell into it all the time. So that's the critical thing about it. So how do I use systemd right and how do
I create a systemd process or a systemd service process and service people kind of use those terms I suppose
interchangeably. So you create a service file right and that defines how the system will run
your app. So let's have a look at a service file and let's see what it looks
like. Right? So understanding a dotservice file. So if we did the last lab right on Monday, if you're that far,
you would have seen one of these already. So let's just go through it in a bit more detail. So here's an example of a general umservice
file, right? And aller files, right? All these um systemd service files, they all
go typically in this location. Certainly on the Raspberry Pi, this is where they'll go. They'll go in etc.
for/systemd/system. And then you'll have if you look in this um folder here, right on your Pi, right?
This folder here. You'll see a bunch of them in there already, right? For background services that are already
part of the Raspberry Pi OS. There's loads them in there. Okay. And that stands for etc. That's these are just
kind of miscellaneous systemwide kind of settings and configurations that stands
for etc. for/etc/systemd/system and in there you're going to get a lot
of service files and let's just say I'm creating a new service for called myapp.service right so I might create a
new file in this location right called my app.service service and in
that file I'll put in this right and this is how I specify
my uh uh systemd uh processor service
right so let's go through there's three main parts of it there's unit there's service and there's install and this is
typical right for all service if you look you can have a look in this folder on your Raspberry Pi and have a look at
some that are already there and you'll see these three different parts service. Let's go through each. So the unit one.
So unit right this um part of this service file this defines the kind of
metadata and any dependencies that this service so you can define the description like here like we have a
short explanation of why what this service does. So it's my Python app service, right? No big deal, right? Um
so that can be anything there. It's just a description. You put a put in. This is good. This is cool, right? Look at this.
You can also define some dependencies. Now there's more than can go there's more that that can go in here but I'm
just showing you what what's some settings that you can do here. So this for instance in this example after
equals network.target target right this ensures that this service right starts
after the network is ready right so this is this is kind of cool so that's what I mean about remember I said system D is
like an a conductor of an orchestra right and you can define when services
start so essentially I'm telling systemd you only start this service after the
network is ready after like for instance you know you're connected to the Wi-Fi we have a connection to the network then
start this service because this service might depend on an internet connection and if it's a web API, yeah, it does,
right? There's no point starting it if you don't have a connection to the network, right? So, if it has dependencies on the network or stuff
that it needs to connect to on the network, it's probably a good idea that we wait until after the network is
started up. You know, the Raspberry Pi will boot. It will take a time to connect to the whether it's Ethernet or
whether it's Wi-Fi, it'll take a time to create all those connections and get those interfaces up and running. This
ensures that the service will not start until after all that is done. Right? So that's just an example. There's other
kind of specifications I can dependencies I can put in there as well in systemd. But that's kind of important
for the type of stuff we do particularly for networking and you know connected
applications that use a network. That's typically what's in there. So that's the kind of unit part of this service file.
The next part then is the service, right? the service part. So this this is
the kind of the meat of yours file. This actually defines how the program will run, right? So it tells us where the
location of the actual program you want to run is and how you want to run it. So
let's start with this is critical the execute start or exx start right this is
the full command used to launch your program. So there it is equals. So there it There. Look, that's the full
command used to launch my program. So, you can see it's user bin python 3, right? And then homepi my app. And
there's my app. There's my Python program. So, what I do when I'm writing do service files is that I will take
what I'm going to put here. I will open up a terminal, right? Um, and I will
paste this in and I will run it manually just to make sure it runs because that's essentially that's what's going to
happen here. It's going to try and run this execute this command. Okay, so I'm
running like I'm there's that user bin Python 3. So it's the fully kind of qualified location of where the Python 3
binary is the Python 3 um program is. And then there's my script homep my
app.py. So this is just an example, right? um the working directory where you know
when this process starts the working directory for this process right where it's going to run from right home pi my
app in this case right typically that's quite typical that it's where the actual location where the script or executable
is um this restart okay equals always right
so the work directory where where it runs the folder where the service runs
um this restarts restart equals always means it will restart the service automatically if it crashes. Right? So
I'm telling it here, right? If this service crashes, if it stops running for whatever reason, please try and start it
again. Okay? Um and you'll see in a minute you can actually specify how long you want it to wait before it tries and
restarts or the kind of how long it will take. The user um uh here indicates
the actual user that you want to use to run the process. Um sorry. Yep. There you go. Yep. So the
user um that uh the user account that actually runs this service. So you will
have logged in. In this case, it's Pi, but you'll see in a sec in our examples that we're using in our um in our labs,
it'll be the user, your Raspberry Pi user that you've used to log in. So, it'll be the Linux user you want to uh
the user account that you want to run the service. Okay? And then you can specify environment variables. Now, I
know you've covered environment variables in the Linux side of the course. So, I can specify environment
optional environment variables specific to this service. For instance, here I can specify you know the path
environment variable for this process and also look at this flask env. So
let's say for instance this is a flask app a flask web application or a flask web API. I can specify the environment
if this is actually production that could be development it could be staging but that's saying like this is running
in production. So the these environment variables then will be accessible to the program to maybe configure how it will
actually execute. We'll talk we'll see those in a in the lab this week or the lab associated with this today's content
and also I'll talk about it in a minute right and then the final section then so that's unit and service and the final
section of the system def file is install. So this defines when the service should start, right? Um and
wanted by multi-user.target means it will start. When I put in wanted by multi-user.target,
this just indicates that we want this to start automatically during the normal
boot process and without a desktop guey.
And that's kind of important to us for background services or background processes that we want. And it's kind of
important to us particularly for running headless right we want it to start during the normal boot process without a
desktop guey without it doesn't need a desktop guey so we want it's wanted by essentially multi-user that target so
every kind of user so we just wanted to start automatically during a normal boot
so that's the three sections of a service file um just to kind of go through it in the context of what we're
doing right um let me just open a terminal here um here we Oh, right. Um,
I'm just going to put it over here. Um, if you can see that, hopefully. Yep. And
then what I'm just going to do is SSH into my P Raspberry Pi.
And I'm going to use MDNS to get at it. Right. MD arpi.local. HD
arch. That we talked about last week. And hopefully that will uh ask for Yeah.
put in my password and I'm into my Raspberry Pi. Super. And what I want to
do here is um it's just a few things that I've done before, but let's just
say I want to um bear with me one for one sec here. Um I want to actually have
a look at my um systemd file here for this um
for what I'm doing here. Um so what I'm going to do here like Uh, I'm going to use nano. Um, and by the way, it's
probably easier to um it's probably easier to work with um
service files directly in the um
on the command line. It certainly is for me using something like nano. So, I'm going to use nano here. I I I know
you've come across nano with Caroline's part of the course, with the Linux part of the course. So, I'm just going to nano and like I said before, etc.
systemd system and look here's sense-mqtt.service service. You might have done this
already. This is coming from the lab. And if we have a look at an example, here's an example of a service file on
my Raspberry Pi for uh my the sense MQTT
Python program you created in the last lab. So you can see the different sections there. It's MQTT sens
start after the network starts up. That's what we want to start it. There's my working directory. The reason I'm showing you this is I just want to point
out some critical things here. in the service section, you see this user equals Frank, right? That's the
user I want to specify that that that runs this service essentially. Okay. Um,
so that's the the the the user account that runs the service. And that username that I put in there typically is a
username that I use to log in or authenticate with the device. So in this case it's Frank for me but what it's
whatever you used when you you know created your uh configuration for your Raspberry Pi OS whatever username you
put in and you can see here the working directory here is home/home/frank
so this is essentially the location of where the the program I want to execute is in this case it's home frank week
9-Lab 2 this has come directly from the lab um um
this week All right. And then you can see here, look the execute start what I want to use to start this program. So
it's home frank week 9-Lab 2. So that's today's lab and then env/bin/python.
So I want to use this is another critical thing I want to talk about here.
You saw in the lab, the last lab, um we're going to use Python virtual environments now um to run our Python
apps. Um, and it just it's a safer way to do it because it makes sure that any kind of dependencies, any libraries we
install, we don't we're not kind of upsetting anything else that's pre-existing on the Raspberry Pi or any other programs. So, essentially what I'm
doing here with execute start is that I'm using the Python the virtual environment, the Python interpreter from
the virtual environment that I created for this program. And then look over here. So I'm going to use that Python
interpreter there, that Python executable like home Frank week 9 lab 2env
bin python and then here's the program I want to run and that's the fully
qualified name the full name from the root. So it's for/home/frank
again see the username right week 9 lab 2 sense_mqtpy.
So there's the python program that I want to run for this service. Okay, how can I test this? And as I said, what I
usually do when I do this is I'll take that, right? I would have tested this myself. I would have take a copy of that
and I would have run it from the command line just to make sure it actually runs, right? That it's correct.
Um, and then look, restart always and restart. This is something I didn't show you. So, I want it to automatically
restart on failure and I want it to try to restart every 5 seconds if it fails.
So, just give it a bit of time before it restarts. Okay. And then in the install section, I wanted I want to specify that
it will start automatically during normal boot. So I put this wanted by equal multi--user.target.
Right? So that's um that's a systemd
file. That's how it would look. Um and then once I've created it, I'll save it and I'll go back to my command line. The
next thing I want to do is once I create just let's just say I've just created this uh sense-m.service
service file that's going to run some program in the background right when when the system boots up. So I have to
actually um use something called uh system control or systemct
uh l the process manager essentially to set it up so and to set it up with
systemd so it'll run to like tell systemd about it and to start it. So how do I do that? If I go back to my slides
here, let's talk about that and move on here. Right. So, um, systemd commands.
Once I've created my systemd file, I need to essentially tell,
uh, systemd about it, right? Uh, kind of register it with systemd and tell it how
how it should use it. And I use this the process manager systemctl to do that.
Um, and let's kind of go through that. So, here's a list of the commands I would have. and you generally run run
them as a pseudo user because it's they're kind of system based stuff. So,
uh once I create um a new specification for a new service like a files service
file and I put it in the right location and what I'll usually do is run the damon reload. So, I restart the process
manager um to get it to reload. So, it'll reload systemd and in this way
it'll pick up any new services that are in there, right? Um, and then what I'll do is I'll use system control to start
my new service. Right? If I ever want to stop it, I can also use just systemcttl stop.
And then once I start it, it's always good to check the status. Now, I'm just
saying that in my experience when I create systemdervices, typically the
first time I do it, right, I'll go and I'll create my service file. I'll put it in the right place. I'll go out to the
command line. I'll reload the uh the Damon. I'll start the service and then
I'll check the status and it won't have started. There'll be a problem with it. And that's where you have to kind of
diagnose it. And typically it's because the execution path is wrong. What I've specified where the file is that I want
to execute that's wrong. I might have used the wrong user. There's typically problems. So that's why this status look
this command this is really important to check if my service is running all right checks the status and logs for the
particular service itself. Systemd keeps track of how it's getting on. So if it tries to start a service and it fails it
will log it. If it starts a service and succeeds it will also log it. So you need when you start a new service and
you set it up you'll check it. So once it's started and you're happy with it, if you want it to start at boot time, if
you want it to actually kick off every single time you start your Raspberry Pi,
so you know, if it's a web API or if it's some service that's taking sensor data and sending it to the internet like
we're going to look at right ne in the next topic, then you will want to run
this command. You'll do systemctl enable and then the service. So that ensures that that service will start when your
Raspberry Pi boots and every time your Raspberry Pi boots. So every time I boot up, it will start the program in the
background and it will do whatever it's going to do. So if it's a if it's a web API, it's going to run the web API and
make it available to the network. If it's an MQTT client like we're going to look at now, it'll start sending sensor
data immediately up to an MQTT broker or to a cloud service where it can get at
it, right? So, it's great like that, right? Um, if I ever want to switch it off, as in stop it, uh, so it doesn't
start at boot time, I use the disable option for the system uh, process
manager here. Right, disable and the name of the service as well. Okay. And then I can use generalctlu
my app to kind of view the logs for a particular service over historically to see how it's gotten on. Again, this is
this will be used to diagnose problems if the service isn't available or wasn't available and becomes available again. I
can look at the logs um to do that. So to give you an idea of how that runs, if
we go back here, I'm in my Raspberry Pi here um and say I've just created this
using nano. just created this new service file. What I would do here to
make it run, right, um is I would run my using systemctl here to my system
process manager. I would reload that, right? So now it's picked up this new
service and then what I would do is start it. Okay.
And then what I can do then is enable it. Right? Importantly, right? So now
the service has started. It should be running on my Raspberry Pi as we speak in the background and now I've enabled
it. So now it's it will it will run every time the pro the the every time
the Raspberry Pi boots, right? So those three commands are kind of critical, right? And look um just to check the
status, I can run this command here and what it should tell me look there you go. Fantastic. And then it gives me the
an update about my service. So It says there, look, systems control enabled. Yeah,
service that's enabled. Preset enabled. It's running since 11:48. Uh, it's
actually was running. I've had it running before, so I didn't. And then you can see here a lot of information.
And you can see here, look, it's sending data up to the cloud as we speak, right? Um, so that's all running fine there.
Um, if I come out of that, um, what I can do also is I could stop the service
if I want to like that. Okay. And um it'll kind of tell me. Yeah. You see there
it stopped. Right. So we can see there I've stopped the service and I can then start it again if I want again from the
command line. And I can check the status again. Right. And you can see there look
it's started. And you can see there I started at 1243. So this is really good stuff folks. Um
particularly for Linux, right? And it's not just specific. Again, just to kind of reiterate, this isn't specific just
to the Raspberry Pi. Um, this applies to any Linux system. System D is
everywhere. Ubuntu, most Linux distributions now have systemd. And this
is how you would kind of run processes on a Linux system. How you would run them in the background, how you
configure them to start when the system boots, and also how you can check them out. you look at the statuses and stuff
like that. Okay, so that's um that's system D. And in the lab in both labs
this week, there's two labs. You're going to one is going to create a web API that you can interact with your RA
Raspberry Pi and Sensat with the ne the next one that you're doing to do today is MQTT, which is different that uses
the MQTT protocol. That's I'm just about to talk about and that again we set that
up as a systemd service. Okay. And just to remember, once you create a service
and you enable it, every time you switch that Raspberry Pi on, it's going to
explode into life and it's going to start doing whatever you programmed it to do. So if it's sending loads of data
to some process in the cloud, it's going to send loads of data. It's going to do that in the background. So it's
consuming processor, right? It's consuming memory to do that. So, if you
don't need it, right, if you don't need it, what you would do, of course, is you would disable it, right? You'd switch it
off, right? Um, there you go. Look. Boom. So, you do that one. Do that
command there. So, once you're finished with your service, once you're if it's a lab, particularly, right? Maybe you
don't want it running anymore, right? So, once you finished this week's lab, it is a good idea. Maybe I'll update the
labs. I don't think I put that in the labs this week. Maybe I'll update the lab to tell you just switch it off,
right? Switch off the service. You don't want it starting every time forever more with your Raspberry Pi, right? Because
it's only a lap. Okay, so that's systemd. Really important, really useful
for you, and you will see this again if you're going to stay in computer science. I have no doubt. And if you end
up working with Linux, without a doubt, you're going to come across systemd if you haven't already. Maybe Caroline
covered it with you as well, but I know Caroline touched on processes, right?
And you would have seen that when you looked at OSS and things like that. And I just want to talk a little bit about
that in in the context of what we've just done here. So when you use systemd, you are starting a process. You are
configuring and starting and stopping a process on Linux. So it behaves like any other process
that's there. You're managing it just through systemd. So ps the command ps
command in Linux or process status you can use that to have a look at processes
that are running as you probably know on your Raspberry Pi and you can use them to check out the stuff you know you can
use systemctl to look at it as well but to see everything anything and
everything from a Linux point of view you can use the ps command to see a snapshot of all the running processes
who they are what they're doing at any particular time. Now, we're going to look at the this BSD and positives.
There's different styles of how you use PS. I think you use the BSD style with
Caroline. So, there's a couple of commands that we can use um to just check out what's going on on our uh u
machine. So, if I've opened a shell command and I type in ps and then a um
that will just show me all the shells processes for that shell, right? show me any background processes. And if I do it
here, like I have a shell open here, right? It's true secure shell. Um, and if I type PSA, I get a couple of
processes there, right? Um, that are running from this shell, right? Um, the
VS Code server um is running that's enabling this shell um or that's running in the background as well. And so that
that's kind of and the P that's what I've run there. But if I want to see all
processes for all users including uh background processes as
well, I can run psux and I should get a load. Yeah, there's a
lot going on, right? It's a Raspberry Pi OS, a Raspberry OS. It's a fullyfledged
OS, so it's going to have plenty of different processes and child processes
running in the background, each with a P and each uh P. You can see that and I'm
going to get an idea of what CPU they're consuming at any time. If I'm particularly interested in my service,
as in the Python ones that I'm kind of looking at, then we can use I know you know how to use GP now. So, we can do
something like I don't know psux and then let's type in a gp
uh for I don't know uh mqtt that process that I
just ran there and I can see here it's going to bind the processes associated with MQTT here. Yeah. So, you can see it
there. Look. Um so there is my process that I started with um
with MQTT there and I can see home Frank week 9 the emb
I can see the full process. So I can see essentially what's and and use Gret to kind of home in and just see if my
processes are running. This is just the reason I'm showing you this is that's a good way to kind of check if the process
that I've kicked off is running and it's uh if specifically if I need the process
ID for for any reason. Um so that's just and you'll see I think it'll come up in
the lab this week as well. So that's what PS is used but I know I'm not going to go into it too much more. There's lots of other commands with PS in terms
of how you can use it. Um I can look for a particular process as well if I use the P um option here and I put the P ID
the process ID for get a specific process ID as well. So that's um that's
uh PS and process status just to kind of
make you aware of that. But I think as far as I know um you would have seen this already with Caroline's stuff. So
I'm not going to go any further into it. I want to talk about and again you would
have come across environment variables as well but I want to talk about this in the context of Python and programming
and again this is not just specifically for Python but um as you know
environment variables are key value strings provided by the OS to configure apps they're used by apps and they're
used to configure apps and we it's a good idea and you'll see this in
JavaScript as well and other programming languages perhaps that it's probably a good idea to take certainly sensitive
information or configuration information that might change depending on where a program is running to take that out of
the program where it might be explicitly or um
specified in a program like in as a string or something like that take that out of the program and make it an environment variable right so that means
I don't have to change the code so we can keep we can use environment variables to keep secrets and
configuration values that might change over time or
depending on how we're how we want to configure our apps out of the code. It's good design decision, right? It's a good
um design approach, right? So, one example of this is uh to change behavior
per environment. So, if I'm developing a application going through the development phase of
it, then I might be in the dev phase. So I might set set the kind of environment
to be dev and when it's staging when I'm getting ready to move in production I might change it to staging and then when
it's in production I might get to change it to production. So how this might affect how the program runs is that it
might affect what database it tries to connect to. So when it's in dev it will connect to the dev database. When it's
in production it'll attempt to create it will connect to the production database.
So that's kind of how you might use an environment variable. We also use
environment variables for API keys, right? Sensitive information or secrets. We can keep them out of our program.
They're not hardcoded as literal as in our program. We keep them out of the program and we put them as an
environment variable, right? Separate to the program. That means they're not going into repos, right? That might be
up on GitHub that might be accessible to all in Sunre, right? database URLs,
paths, homes, that kind of stuff. So, how do we get at them in Python? That's
the key, right? That's that's kind of important, right? So, um we can to do
that, we can import the OS library in Python stands for operating system. And
we can once we import that, we can use the OS. What we get from that is this object and we can call the get en method
and give it the name of the environment. And that will return the value for that
environment variable, right? Whatever that is, whatever that might be. If I use get en right, and it doesn't exist,
it's not there, right? It's not in the OS doesn't know what home is. It doesn't have an environment variable called home, then it'll just return none,
right? Nothing, right? No. Um, what I can also do with this method is I can
provide a second parameter which is a default fallback, right? So I can try and get path and if there's no path I
just set it as an empty string. Doesn't have to be an empty string by the way. I don't know why I used I should have put something in there. But you'll see this
in the lab this week where we can try and get the location of the MQTT broker
we're going to work with. Right? If it's an environment variable, we'll use that. If not, we have a default test broker
that we'll use. So there's a default fallback and that default fallback is specified in this second parameter here.
In this case, it's just an empty string if there's no path, right? We can also call environ right this environ method
on the OS object. And what this can do is look for essentially say let's say API key. It's looking for an environment
variable called API key. If it finds it fair and good, it assigns that value to this variable. If it doesn't, it raises
a key error if it's missing. Right? And if we want now I again we're kind of
going fast into Python with error handling. We can catch that but this
raises an error if it's missing and that's good if it's required config. So it might be the case that I'm look I
might be writing a program that really relies on an API like a weather API you know open weather map or something like
that like the APIs we talked about earlier in the week. I'm going to write a Python program. It's going to use a
third party API. it has an API key without the API key can't get at the API
right it's going to API is going to refuse connection if that's the case then my program doesn't run so I might
want to run it like this right so that this will raise a key error and I can catch that key error in my program and
say right there's no key and then just gracefully stop the program rather than letting the program just crash and then
if it's a systemd process maybe do some so it doesn't try and restart itself over and over and over again Okay. So,
look, that's just some usage. Um, I wanted to introduce this and describe it to you because you're going to see it in
the labs this week. Okay. You'll see it in the lab. And that in Python is how we
can get at environment variables on our Linux that's running on our Raspberry Pi. And again, that's not just Raspberry
Pi. I'm talking about if you run this is a um OS. This let's talk about OS
actually, right? OS this module right it's a CL cross platform doorway to
operating systems so I can run a program on my Raspberry Pi right and get at
environment variables I can run the same program on my Windows machine right in front of me here I can use the OS module
to get at um environment variables on my Windows OS as well so it abstracts as I
said there it abstracts the differences between Windows Linux Mac OS whatever you're having yourself code stays
portable so it should run OS will run in the same way on all those different operating systems now we're using it
look you'll see it in the lab this week we're going to use it to manipulate and get at environment variables on the
Raspberry OS that's running on a Raspberry Pi however it does much more than that
um you can use it to manipulate files like um and file systems like get it to
make folders uh list directories move files, create a child directory,
get, you know, lots of different create list, move, delete files and directories, all that kind of stuff,
right? Um, environment access, that's what we just talked about there. Read and set process environment variables,
right? Um, and you can also get it to kind of use kind of do cross path, get
paths, right? um and abstract paths and do relative path
addressing and stuff like that. But for us really um all we really want to look at for our
our labs is this environment access. That's what we're going to use it for.
Um so if we want to read and set environment variables in Python, we use this OS library, this OS object. We can
use the get env to get say for instance a user ID. This is taken straight from the lab. I can look for this environment
variable on the OS. If it finds it, fair and good, right? It will return whatever
value the OS has set has been set on the OS for user ID and then maybe assign it
to the variable. So I can have like user ID is equal to OS.get
and look at and this is sorry this is on two lines but if user ID doesn't exist
that's the default FX wash. It's just an example. it's my kind of GitHub username. So, it'll go off and look for
a particular user ID, a user ID environment variable. If it doesn't find it, if it doesn't exist on the OS, it
will use this value instead. That's really neat, right? So, um
so if I want if I if the value is required as it said and you can do the fail fast, this is just a summary of
what I talked about already. If I wanted to look for an environment variable that is definitely it doesn't have any
default value like a key an API key then I can use I would use environ I give it
the name of the environment variable I'm looking for and if it doesn't find it it will fail fast as in it will raise a key
error um and it will raise a key error and then I can process that in my
program okay and you can also by the way these are get environments you can also look you can set environment variables
as well. So I can use this environ method on the OS object here to set a
value for say an environment variable called debug. I could set that to one and it's available. It just affects the
current process. This environment variable will only be available to the current process and not any other
processes that are running on the program on the on the OS. But if I want to set an environment variable, I could
set it that way. Okay. So that's all I wanted to talk about in relation to
that. So that's um just a couple of key features that I wanted to cover in
relation to um running Python on a device like the
Raspberry Pi and running it as a process in the background and accessing environment variables and how you would
do Python. So again, you're going to see this stuff in the lab this week. So that's why I covered it there. But what
I want to move on to now and again if you have any questions by the way um let me just open and make sure Slack has
just disappeared there in the background. You have any questions while I'm going on here please throw them into the Slack um channel. I'm happy to
answer them as I'm going on. So the next uh thing I want to talk about now is
MQTT. Right. So up to now we've we've done a little bit of Python. We've
created a Python program that can run on our Raspberry Pi. We've used that to create a web API that can listen uh that
can take HTTP requests and process them and return a HTTP response. So we've
used flask to do that in the last lab. We talked about HTTP in the last lecture
on Monday. Now I want to move on a bit and I want to talk about indirect. I
want to talk about messaging as distinct from requests, HTTP requests and responses. And this is this is kind of
an interesting topic I think in general. So again what I'm going to talk about here I'm going to talk about a particular protocol called MQTT
but the uh messaging itself has a broader context here. Again, what you're
going to learn here is a much kind of has is transferable is applicable to far
more than just using Raspberry Pi and Internet of Things and all that kind of stuff. It's an it's it somehow some it's
related to what we call eventdriven architectures which is a really important area of computer science and
messaging is an important part of that. So let's talk about indirect messaging. So bear with me folks while I just open
up um the new slide deck in relation to this.
There we go. So what I want to talk about now is
indirect messaging, right? Uh what is indirect messaging and how we can use
it? Um oops, wrong window.
So, uh, indirect messaging, you could think about it as using a middleman,
right? Um, up to now, we've only cons considered in my what my kind of limited
time with you, we've cons considered up to now is direct communication, right?
um what I'm talking about when I talk about direct communication is something like that where we have A and B in
general and then A talks to B and B talks to A. So when we think about the
client server stuff we were looking at with HTTP what you looked at in networking essentially this is how it
works right if we think about um the last lab we did in HTTP
um A might be a web browser B would be a web server where A makes a request to B
for a particular resource and B responds sends a HTTP response with that so A and
B they're connected directly This introduces a degree of rigidity, right?
Um so um what we want to look at is um
couple of uh kind of scenarios here is like let's consider something here. What
happens if a device fails during kind of direct coupling? So let's just say
our web API. If I have a web API, a flask web API or a web server running,
okay, and it fails, right? it falls over for some reason it crashes. um if I try
if A is in conversation with B if trying connect tries to connect with B right what happens if it fails during direct
coupling okay nothing works right okay okay um
and what if I again this is another thing is that what if I'd like to add
say if I have a using B here right say with a web API um what if I want to add
more A's more clients or more servers um to the conversation.
How do I scale it? Right? Um A, as you know from networking now, for this to work, right, A needs to know where B is,
right? Um it needs to have to have an IP address, right? And then for B to make the response, it needs to know where A
is, right? It needs the IP address, right? It needs a MAC address or an IP address. It needs a MAC address if it's
on the same segment. It needs an IP address if it's internet networking, right? um would have covered that in
networking. So that's what we've been we've been working up to now, right? So
um what about the middleman? What if we do something like this? What if we stick something in the middle like this where we have A and B separate separated by
this intermediary and A communicates with the intermediary and intermediary communicates with B. A bit like a
mortgage broker or sort of uh an estate agent, right? um where you've got buyers
and sellers and you've got somebody in the middle that brings them together. A might know who B is and B might know who
A is but this intermediary kind of manages the communication. It's kind of
what we're going to look at now. Um we look at look we look at this intermediary and when once we introduce
this into a process right we get couple of nice features. We've got space uncoupling and time uncoupling.
It's just a fancy way of saying uh once we have an intermediary right devices if
we talk about it in terms of devices or nodes on a network um they don't need to
and inverted commas know about each other. So if I have this intermediary here A doesn't need to know about B it
doesn't need to know its IP address it doesn't need to know its MAC address doesn't need to know at like that right
and similarly B doesn't need to know anything about A it doesn't need to know its address okay that can be carried out
by the intermediate right similarly like if I think about it to give you um an analogy if I'm you know at a if I'm uh
buying a house. I don't need to know the buyer. Um and I the buyer doesn't need to know the seller and the seller
doesn't need to know it's the buyer. The broker in the middle takes care of that relationship passes messages between the
two. Right? So that's space uncoupling. They don't I don't know have to know where they live. I don't need their to
know their address things like that. Time uncoupling. Um with an intermediary
um devices don't need to be available at the same time. So if B is not available,
if A sends a message to B and B is not available, the intermediary can hold on to that message until B is available and
then send it on to them. And similarly when B sends a response, if A has gone away or gone to sleep or fallen off a
cliff or whatever, an intermediary can hold on to that message, that response
until A is available. So using this middleman approach right
and that's what indirect communication is we can get what's called these two very important and useful properties
space uncoupling time uncoupling devices don't need to know about each other and they don't need to be available when they actually communicate all right so
that's the kind of essence of indirect communication and that's what we get
from something called MQTT has been around for a while quite a
couple of years created by IBM in uh stands I don't it's one of those acronyms that kind of came out of now or
uh M message Q telemetry transport that's what it stands for I think um and
it uses what's called a publish subscribe mechanism and it's lightweight in both bandwidth and code footprint so
it's very lightweight protocol it's fast doesn't use up too much bandwidth in fact it smallest messages two bytes um
and its code footprint is very small. You can implement this on a very small constrained device. Even
microcontrollers that are tiny that run off uh as these coin batteries can run MQTT
clients. So that's why it's quite popular in internet of things and
connecting kind of low power devices that might be connected all the time that might be constrained in terms of
memory and things like that. So how does MQTT work? It uses this
publish subscribe paradigm or mechanism. Right? So what happens is you've got
couple of there's a bit of vocabulary around this. You have topics and subscriptions. Right? So messages are
published to a topic. These topics exist on an MQTT broker, right? So this is a
service that's running somewhere, right? That's accessible both by what we call publishers and subscribers. Publishers
publish messages and subscribers subscribe to those messages. Right? So topics are subscriptions. Uh messages
are published to topics and then clients can subscribe to a topic or even a set
of related topics, right? Um and then you've got publish and subscribe. So
clients, MQTT clients can subscribe to topics or they can publish data to
topics as well. Right? So let's just say an example of a publisher. A publisher might publish data will publish messages
to an MQTT broker and that broker will be running somewhere in the cloud maybe could be running on a server in a
particular organization could be running on a cloud server in AWS or something like that or a free as we're going to
see in a minute um a free service somewhere. So it will publish a message to a particular topic like you know news
or light uh or engine status or something like that in that MQTT broker.
And that MQTT broker can have one or it can have none but it can have one or
more subscribers. And when a message is published to an MQTT broker, it will
push those messages, right? When once a message is published, that message is sent to every single subscriber to that
topic, right? So you publish a message to a topic and then that message is then
sent to every single subscriber to that topic. And those subscribers can be one,
two, 10, 10,000. It doesn't matter right once MQTT broker has the muscle to kind
of send all those messages. But every subscriber will get that message immed nearly immediately as as quick as it can
be sent. So that's kind of how MQTT works with this publish subscribe
paradigm. Publishers publish messages messages to an MQTT broker and then
those that MQTT broker sends those messages to all the subscribers. Subscribers can be phone apps. They can
be Raspberry. They can be devices like the Raspberry Pi. They can be multiple different types of devices. Okay. Um and
that's kind of and and the key thing is topics here. You subscribe to topics. So that's how
MQTT works in general. It is an open-source protocol, right? Lots of implementations. The one we're going to
look at is the Mosquito implementation, but there's micro broker. is uh or it's
one implemented in C that runs in very constrained devices. There's loads of cloud broker services up there. So if
you Google MQTT, if you ask ChatGpt about MQTT, you'll get a load of information about it. How
this process works is like like this. You've got publishers and you've got subscribers. A message, right? And a
message is just like think of it as a JSON message or it could be a string. It could be anything. It could be a number.
It's published once by a publisher right and then many things can receive the
message right and the messaging service is commonly we know we call it an MQTT
broker this messaging service provides the decoupling right between the
producers and the consumers of the messages. So think of it. Remember what I talked about before. A publisher can
publish a message. It has no the publisher has no idea or no direct connection to who is actually going to
get that message. The person who know the only entity that knows that is the the broker right. So a
producer sends or publishes a message right on a particular topic. Think of a
topic as like a subject you know engine status light color could be any topic at
all. um temperature, humidity, right? And a consumer subscribes or makes a
subscription for messages on a particular topic and a message broker matches publications to subscriptions.
If no messages are occur, right? If there's no uh subscription for a
particular publication, message messages just discarded or it'll be held on to. If one or more matches occur then
message is delivered to each mass matching subscriber or consumer. So that's the publish subscribe process
right I publish something and then it subscribe. So the key thing the key a
key feature of this publish subscribe mechanism is topics. We call them topics in MQTT. I can publish I can write a
program um that publishes messages to a topic and then other I can also write a
program that subscribes to a particular topic. So every time somebody something or somebody publishes a message to a
topic every subscriber gets it right. How do we specify those topics? So in MQTT
the topic refers to a string that the broker uses. It's a it's a string that
the broker uses to filter messages to each connected client. This is what a topic looks like bit like and it's
hierarchical. So it's a bit like a directory structure. It's not directories, not folders, but it's similar. So you'll have a top level
topic and then you can have subtopics, right? And a topic level separator is
this forward slash, right? So topic level here. So the first level here is
my home for slash. So you can see it's kind of human readable. So I might have a topic like on an MQTT broker called my
home. It's my home for/groundfloor/ living room/temp.
So I can write a program right like my uh on my say on my Raspberry Pi right
that publishes data to that topic on a particular broker once I know where the broker is. So can publish temperature
data right just a number. Okay. So each topic right so I can and it's up to me
as the developer and once a broker is there I can publish to any topic once I can connect to the broker and access it
right so each topic must contain at least one character um the topic and that it permits empty
spaces if I want one key thing and I have it in bold print and you can spend you can go down a rabbit hole with this
one um just remember that topics are case sensitive so you can write code
that subscribes to a topic and then you should expect data through true and you're not getting anything and you the
topic looks right and you spend ages looking at your code and stuff like that. For instance, if I publish to this
topic here and then I subscribe to this topic but I use a capital G, that's not
going to work, right? Um so it is case sensitive, right? Um just remember that
it is case sensitive. So let me just um erase that there. um if I could I won't
bother right you can also um subscribe to more than one topic and you can use
what uh one way you can do that is wild cards so remember it's hierarchical so I
could subscribe to something like this my home ground floor and then put a plus in that's a wild card so every topic
that matches this pattern in my home ground floor anything for/ temperature
so if I want all the temperature messages for to the ground floor in my home. That's the way I might have
constructed it. That's what I can use if I want all the messages that relate all the MQTT messages on a particular broker
um that match my home for/gray on floor, right? Um that's the way it'll work. And
you can only use this on one level, by the way. You can only use the single level wild card on one level. And you
can only use this wild card at the end, right? It's multiple topic. it'll give
you multiple topic levels. So you we can use that at the end of a particular topic. Right? So I'll show you this working in a while when we look at
examples. So that's MQTT topics. I'm not going to spend a lot of time about this about the characteristics. The protocol
itself um is uh it's compressed to a small number of bytes. Maximum number is
max smallest packet size is two bytes which is pretty small. Um this is a
standard packet structure here. You have a control header that's used for control information, the connection. You have a
packet length and then you have a variable length header. That's where your data go. Um variable length header
just indicates the size um of the message as well. It's not always present. Sorry. But the payload is the
important bit, right? And that's where your message that contains the data being sent. Um so I'm not going to spend
a huge amount of time about this. I'm more interested about the its usage,
right? your pro, how you're going to use use it, right? Um, theoretically, you
can go up tound 256 megabytes for MQTT 5.0 in terms of your payload size.
Real realistically, you shouldn't really go up near that, right? Um, it's MQTT is
specifically designed for very kind of lightweight messaging, text messaging, not sending anything like files or
anything like that. generally for that's why it's so useful for things like sensor data for status updates for
controlling device remote devices right uh default maximum for mosquito is
actually one one megabyte right that's the maximum payload size um and IoT in
if you I AWS Amazon web services have a bunch of IoT brokers uh MQTT brokers 128
kilobytes is the maximum they will accept and that you wouldn't want to really be going any bigger than that to be honest
Okay. Um I'm going to talk about a few bit a little bit about characteristics but this is important right uh whatever
about the protocol and how it looks uh one feature of the protocol it's a connection based protocol. So one
feature with protocol is QoS of quality of service. So in a brok uh when I when
I'm interacting with a broker I can specify um a quality of service. Um and there's three different levels zero one
and two. and zero is like fire and forget right um so a message is
delivered at most once with this so this is a kind of fire and forget QS1 uh
message is uh sent to a broker it's deleted and it you know uh doesn't survive failures and there's no
duplicates right so that's the most lightweight you know uh message is published that's it and it's forgotten
about and whatever happens after that nothing is done about it right um you've got also got MQo1 one which uh makes
sure at least one message once if I use QoS1 as a publisher I I can ensure at
least one of those message it's published at least once I'll talk about that in a minute um the message is
stored um and it will survive connection losses and but duplicates are possible with QoS1 it means that the same message
potentially could be sent twice three times even or four times and then QoS2
um is delivered exactly once. So this is where I want to send a message. I want to publish a message, should I say, and
I want it published once and once only, right? Um, and that involves a fourstep
handshake, right? The so this one there's no handshake at all. Message is
published, sent to the broker, happy day. That's it. Um, with QoS one, I
expect I will publish a message to a broker and that publish should be acknowledged. Yeah. and QoS2 is where it
will be uh published and acknowledged. That's actually a four-step handshake.
As you can see, as you build up to the QS0, one and two, there is more
overhead. What does more overhead mean? Takes up more resources, takes longer
for the communication to work, okay, to to take place. So there's a overhead in
terms of uh network traffic and all that kind of thing because you have acknowledgements flying around the place and things like that. Um so that's it.
So depending on the application is what QoS you will you will pick and you will
see that in the lab this week we use QoS. So you're publishing um I'll come back to QoS. I have another
slide of it uh a little bit further on here um and we'll talk about it a bit more. So um there are also a bunch of
again I'm not going to spend a huge time about this. So for information to manage all those QoS QS01 and two to
manage connecting to a a MQTT broker there's a lot of control packets it uses
control packets using control headers um to to kind of uh control how the
connection is made how the connection is established whether Q you know what what Q to establish and kind of maintain the
QoS that's specified for a particular uh connection that kind of thing. So that's what
control packets are used for. There's a bunch of them there. I'll not go into them in detail. There's no need for you
to know a huge amount of detail about those, but it's just to show you this is a protocol. It's there's a or FC out
there for it. It's been around for a long time and it's very reliable. Um, and these are all the different types of
control packets you have flying around. As you will see, the reason I'm showing to you now is that you'll see when you
write a program that uses MQTT, you've got to connect first and that'll use connect control packets. And that
connection has to be acknowledged by the broker. Um, if you're publishing, um,
you've got a publish message, you've got a publish acknowledgement that could come through. If I'm going to subscribe
to a particular topic, um, you have a subscribe message and a subscription acknowledgement will come back.
Unsubscribe. If I want to unsubscribe to a topic, I don't want to see receive any more messages from it. I have a
particular control packet that I send for that and the ping request and ping response just check and disconnect just
checks if if a server is still there. That kind of thing that's for kind of um
just to make sure the connection is still alive. So look um these are what
um and if you were to use Wireshark and you run your MQTT programs and look at
Wireshark these are the types of messages you'll see flying around as your program establishes a connection to
a broker as it subscribes to topics as it publishes to topics right that's what's going on there and to give you an
idea about the connection this is what happens TCP at that I don't think MQTT
specifies a transport layer protocol all but TCP at the bottom but a TCP
connection is set up but that connection is completely separate right but after
that in MQTT a connect will happen right a connect request will will be sent to a
MQTT broker that connection will hopefully be acknowledged if any au authentication is required and it does
support authentication that'll be acknowledged then I can subscribe to a topic so a subscribe message will go in
and the topic that I want to subscribe to remember that topics we talked talked about the particular string that's the
the topic string will be that that's what XY Z is here and an acknowledgement will be sent back if that subscription
is acceptable and then if I want to publish to a particular topic then I a
publish control a connect message will be sent so look um that's a subscription
a session lifetime and a subscription so you have to set up a session first with a MQTT broker then you can create
subscriptions or subscribe to topics you You can publish to topics. You can unsubscribe to topics and disconnect as
well from the server too. The MQTT library that we use in Python, as you will see, that is what will take care of
it. Um, and take care of all that messaging underneath the bonnet. But just to let you know, that's what's
going on. That's why you can't. The reason I'm telling you this is because if you try and if you use an MQTT to
subscribe to a topic and you haven't made the connection yet, it's not going to work because you got to connect to
the broker first. Then you subscribe. Um, and if I want to publish to a
particular topic, I have to connect to the, you know, to connect to the broker as well, right? What is more important
is QoS, right? And QoS is important. You'll see this in the lab for particular types of data. Now let's just
say right I'm writing a program that publishes sensor data that's produced a
lot like temperature data say for my Raspberry Pi here as we know we have a sensor humidity pressure gauge on this
right um even just telemetry data about um say for instance remember last week
we would have looked at the um the accelerometer on this the gyroscope
and the different sensors There's even the button here and we'll look at an example in a minute about how the we can detect the button presses here. So that
type of data if that's data is coming through regularly. I want to publish it maybe every 5 seconds. it's you know
it's it's quite quick uh data that's coming quite quickly then it might be that's kind of sensor data might be
suitable for QoS0 at most once fire and forget because I know if I send a
temperature reading and for some reasons reason you know the network goes down when I attempt to publish that data then
I know 5 seconds later I'm going to try and publish it again and again so it'll come through so at most once fire and
forget will be good for that and that's how it works so I'll have a publisher so that might be an application that's
running on my Raspberry Pi, a little Python program. It will publish to a broker um that might be the Mosquito
free broker that's in the cloud. It will try and publish to that QoS0 and then it will just delete the message. The
publisher will just fire fire it and then it will forget about that message. Okay? And then the broker then will
publish that to any subscribers. Right? Now in the meantime like what might happen here is that let's just say for
instance if I try and publish that message and some server or some router along the way like that this broker by
the way could be up in some Amazon cloud over in this US or it could be out in Asia. If that message never makes it I
don't know about it. I'll never find out about it. And similarly if that broker publishes to a subscriber um uh that
might never make it either and I won't ever know about it. But just talk about this relationship here. It doesn't
matter. QoS0 doesn't care about that. It's fire and forget. QoS1 at least once, right? What it will do is that the
publisher and again there's more overhead with this. So QS0 is the simplest. QoS1 is where I want to make
sure this message is um published, right? So I'll publish
with QoS1. What will happen is the publisher will publish uh with QoS1 and
it will it will hold on to the message right it won't delete the message it will wait for acknowledgement what will
happen is the broker will receive that published message it will store the message itself it will publish the
message to all subscribers and then it will delete the message and then after it's done that what the broker will do
key difference here is that it will send an acknowledgement a control MQTT control message back to publisher saying
right I acknowledge your message has been published and then it's then then the publisher will delete the message so
this is all taken care of by the way by your mosquito library whatever MQTT library you're you're taking this is the
protocol is implemented already for you this is what will happen if you specify QoS1 right so the message is stored
until the broker acknowledges that the message has been published to all
subscribers and then the message is deleted. That's QoS1. It's at least once. Okay. Now, why is it called at
least once? This is key is that because uh you might be thinking like, well, that should be
good enough. And why do you have exactly once? What's the difference between QoS1 and QoS2? What could possibly happen
here is that if I publish a message to the broker and the broker then stores
that message and publishes to all subscribers. What happens if that acknowledgement, let's just say that
acknowledgement never makes it back to the publisher? Let's just say there's a network failure or the broker fails to
send the acknowledgement back. You know, there's some network failure on that site or somewhere in between in the intermediary. Then what will the
publisher do? Well, the publisher uh will assume, right? It'll wait a certain amount of time and if it doesn't
get an acknowledgement back, what's it going to do? It's going to publish the message again. It'll publish it twice,
right? And what will happen is the broker as far as the broker is concerned broker acknowledged it. Broker sent the
acknowledgement. Broker will see this as a new message and go all right and it will publish it again. So you that's why
it's called at least once, right? Because there is the possibility that the same message could be published
twice or even more. highly unlikely but it could happen right and this you might
be thinking why is this important well let's just say the publisher is publishing
what we call non a nonite item potent data right and what that are messages that just means that let's just say this
message is uh something to do with I don't know incrementing the or turning
up the volume on something right of a speaker and and same like increase
volume by one. I don't know, right? If that's the case, then if you use at least once, uh possibility that it might
be increased by two or it might be to rotate a a motor, right? Rotate a servo
motor by certain amount of degrees, right? 20 degrees. If it's sent twice, it'll rotate 40 degrees. If it's
something to do with a payment, payment will be done twice, right? So, it's that's not good for those type of
operations. For those type of operations where you just want a message published and you just want it published once,
then you use QoS 2. And what happens there is that as well as the publication
being um uh acknowledged, right? Uh back
from the broker back to the publisher. The publisher always says, "Oh, I acknowledge that you've uh actually
dealt with that. You've published you've dealt with that message." And then uh the message is deleted. So in this
case the message is stored by the broker and the message is only deleted right
after this uh publish release control message comes back from the publisher.
Anyway, long story short, you've got three different QoS's there. At most once, at
least once, and exactly once. At most once means it's fire and forget. At least once. We can be pretty we can be
sure that the message has been published at least once. And QS2 means we can be
sure that that message has been published once and only once, not twice.
So that's kind of what I do and that's how it's done at a network level. It's good to know because we're doing
networking, right? So a little bit about a little bit more about QoS characteristics. um published messages.
They can be what we call retained messages and these kind of important um particularly for the likes of these kind
of devices that might be in locations where they might drop an in drop in and out of network connectiv connectivity.
So retain messages are used to ensure that when a client subscribes to a topic, it will immediately receive the
most recent message for that topic. So essentially the broker will retain the last message for a particular topic and
then if any if there's any new subscribers, it'll send it on to it. So it's kind of nice, right? So publish can
mark a message as retained and the broker and the server remembers the last known good message of a retained topic
and the broker server gives the last known good message to new subscribers. So let's just say I'm using MQTT to kind
of um for a smart door or something for the status whether the door is open or
closed. And if I have a new subscriber, then it gets the last known message as
in the last kind of update to that topic, which might be whether the door is open or closed. Okay, subscriptions
can also be what we call durable, right? So durable is where we want a subscriber
to get all the messages, right? So messages are forward to a subscriber immediately and if a subscriber is not
connected, these messages are stored up by the broker. So there's a lot of overhead with durable, right? So
messages are stored up and forwarded when connected. So this is where we want subscribers to get all the messages that
we sent, right? So this is not like these are kind of messages that might kind of you want every message that you
sent to be received by a subscriber. So that's durable non-durable subscriptions
only active when the subscriber is connected to the server or broker. This is typical for MQTT for most
particularly for sensor data and things like that. Non-durable is fine. You might have a retain message where it
gets the last known good message for a topic and then any subsequent topics while it's connected. And when it disconnects, when it unsubscribes from a
topic, you're not interested in what happened in the meantime. Okay. But for some applications, you might want every
single message that's sent to get to a subscriber, particularly if it drops out of connectivity and back into
connectivity. So I just this could be I don't know location updates if it's a mapping application where it's kind of
rec recording I don't know uh particular way points as as a device is using GPS
to go through a particular uh you know as a device is moving then you might want all those to be sent all the
updates to be sent if if a subscription drops out and comes back in again. Okay,
so there you go. And just a little bit about these like in terms of the features retained versus durable
retained messages stored on a per topic basis available to any new subscriber.
Newly retained messages over override previous ones ensures new subscribers receive the latest message. Not much
overhead to this. In terms of durable messages, this is based on a SL client's subscription. It's based on the QoS and
the session. So it's a bit more involved only cued for offline clients uh with
persistent session with persistent sessions. So again the offline clients they have to have a persistent session
kind of specified for them. No overwrite messages are cued per client
individually. So the messages are stored up as I said and ensures delivery despite disconnects based on QoS levels.
So this one again more overhead on the broker side of things to maintain this and only really suitable for particular
applications but just to let you know that are there in our lab this week right the lab that's just up there now
we will do retained messages not durable okay um and how they are work we'll also look at what's called last will testment
this is a nice feature so you know uh you might if you have a a device you might want to notify other clients about
an ungraceful disconnect um from a client so what you can do is you can
specify a last will uh message when it connects to a broker. So when your
Raspberry Pi as you'll see in the lab when it connects to the broker it can specify a um
um last will message what it's going to and a topic for that. Right? So with a
normal MQTT message with a topic um retain message flag this is this is what
a MQTT a retain message is. It's just a normal topic with a retain message flag
QoS and payload like and when an ungraceful disconnect occurs a broker sends the last will message to all
subscribed clients of the last will message topic. So you can see here when we create a connection as you'll see
this in the lab we'll specify a last will topic and we'll specify the QoS for
that topic in this case it's exactly once and the message that might be sent
expected expected exit for us what we'll do is that we create it and it's really nice thing to be able to do for a device
we create a particular topic just just says where it's online or offline right so that's cool so when I connect um I
set my last will topic to online and then if my program crashes or disconnects um it will if it gets the
chance what it will do it will send the la it will update the last one message to uh offline right and um you can set
it where it's retainable as well so just kind of a little bit about uh last will and you'll see that uh that last will
it's kind of a last will in testament it's specified in the protocol for MQTT and particularly for devices and
connectivity activity. It's a really useful thing to do. So, if you have subscribers to a particular topic, to
particular messages and the publisher goes offline, those subscribers might want to know that and the programs that
run on those subscribers might want to react to it or show it up. So, if I have a dashboard, let's say for a smart home,
I can see whether particular devices are online or offline from their last will and testament topic. Okay. So, MQTT
versus HTTP. Um what's the difference between the two? Um and it's good to
notice this, right? Um MQTT is push delivery delivery of
messages. It's a it's we can build what's called event driven systems or
event driven architectures from M MQTT. So subscribers that like the messages
are pushed rather than um um
uh polling, right? So MQTT uh is low latency push delivery of messages from a
client to a server and server to client. So helps to do this eventoriented ar
event driven or event oriented architecture to the web, right? It's
pretty cool. So I can write a program and you'll see this where it doesn't have to pull a an API to kind of get a
response before it does anything. for HTTP um you push from a client to a server.
So I can do a HTTP request but you pull from from server to client as well. So
like I I p so if I want to get for instance if I write a program for my Raspberry Pi here and as an API like we
did in the last lab to provide temperature data I have to make a request for that data I have to pull that's polling request for a particular
URL and then I get the response back right what I could do with MQTT
is get my and that's what you're going to do this week is you're going to get your Raspberry Pi to publish temperature
or environment data or whatever and then it would kind of you can then get other programs to subscribe to that and as
soon as that topic is updated or a new value goes into it, they get it immediately, right? They get it sent to
them immediately and it's event driven. An event occurs in that program and they they you'll see how it works in the
code. Um the other thing is MQTT uh is very
reliable over fragile networks, right? If a connection is disconnected um based
on the QoS's that we you can deliver messages to the QoS even across connection breaks we can use reliable
and durable messaging to make sure no messages are lost right and we decouple
here's a big thing we're decoupling the publish uh and and using publish and
subscribe we have this one to many delivery um or many to many delivery if you want or many to one delivery it's
very flexible that way and as you will see there's no mention of when we create
all we need to know about is the broker everything else uh you know is decoupled
so sender uh producers and consumers of data are completely decoupled they don't
know they don't need to know about one another just need to know where the broker is publish publishers publish
data to the broker they have no idea who that broker is going to um send that data to right only subscribers right so
it could be 1 2 10 50 20. So very scalable, very flexible, very useful for
AI uh for event orientated architectures um where you want to publish an event
that occur has occurred whatever that event might be. So it could be a door opening, it could be a button being
pressed, which we're going to look at now, and it could have one or many subscribers to that. Okay, little comparison about MQTT and HTTP. Um very
quickly, MQTT is very focused on data, right? Payload, right? what data we're sending. HTTP is about remember we I
talked about resources kind of document actually would prefer if that said resource it's resource
centric we do operation on URLs which URLs refer to a particular resource right but whether it be a HTML page
whether it be a do document whether it be an image whether it be a list of
users okay publish subscribe pattern or paradigm in MQTT it's request and
response as you know in HTTP P MQTT is very simple. Uh HTTP is simple enough,
but it's a little bit more complex. There's a lot of different verbs and stuff like that going on with it. The
message size is small in MQTT. It's larger in HTT uh HTTP.
You've got three QoS settings in MQTT which are enforced over and above what
happens at TCP, right? um all me in HTTP all messages get the same level of
service. You can't specify at least once delivery or anything like that, right?
Um C, Java, JavaScript, Python, there's libraries for um um extra libraries. So
there's all the you know it's implemented across all programming languages. Um same with HTTP as well. Um
and the data distribution it's one to zero, one to one, one to many. It's only onetoone direct coms for MQTT. So let's
look at an example of how you might use MQTT and actually how it's used today
for particular providers of certain health care services. So home care monitoring solutions um there's
companies out there that do kind of assisted living systems where you might have heard ads for them online or on the
radio where they advertise where you kind of uh they can install systems to monitor people in their homes. These
might be elderly people or people that need might need assistance at home. So what they'll have is they'll these
people might have wearables and the wearables um will have a microcontroller
or communicate with a microcontroller or a single board computer type device in the house, right? And those vital signs
are transmitted are published to an MQ uh MQTT broker which again sends those
on to any subscribers. And those subscribers might include uh a computer that exists in a health care
professional's kind of workplace. So for instance, if the vital signs are showing something of that needs immediate
medical assistance, um then that's published that that
message could be published and an alarm raised both at a at a as I say a medical
practitioner's uh professional's system in their office, could be a doctor's surgery or something like that, but also
published directly to a family member's app on on their phone. Okay. MQTT can do
that right. So uh as I say here home and patient instrumented with sensors uh
door motion blood sensor pacemakers defibs collected by a monitoring service
a broker using MQTT and then is subscribed to by health care services at a hospital and then alerts uh relations
or health care professionals if anything is out of order. So this is actually how it's used today in in real life. Okay.
But what I want to do now is um I want to show you an example of it just how we would use it here. Um I'm not going to
go through this example here. This is something I used to do before. But um I want to um
just go through uh actually went through uh a quick example of how you would use it um on the Raspberry Pi. And this is
kind of is very similar to what you're doing in the lab. So, let's um what I need to do here is
go to secure shell on my Raspberry Pi. And I think it's let's hopefully it's still maintained the connection here. I
have a few programs here. Let's just check it out here. So, button. Yeah. So, let's just I'm going to take you through
a little bit of code here um just to show you how you would implement MQTT on the
um on the Raspberry Pi here. And what I'm going to do here is I'm going to implement uh just to describe this demo.
Your Raspberry Pi, here it is, right? It's got a button on the sens. Remember that you would have written a bit of
code last week that interacts with the button. What I want to do is I want to press that button, right? And when I
press that button, I want to publish that event. So when a button is pressed, when the button is pressed on the Sense
app, I'm going to publish that information to an MQTT broker, right? And I'm going to publish it to a topic
FXWalshest. Right? See that for/ FXW? This is the topic on this MQTT broker. And I'm going
to write another program that subscribes to that. And just think of this like I can, you know, once I publish to this
broker, it's available, right, for anybody who wants to subscribe to it. So this button, I can get this button event
to kick off anything, anything at all, right? This was a this was and is a
product. You used to be able have to buy these what they call it smart buttons. You'd stick them on the side of your washing machine. You'd press the button
and it would automatically order um more detergent tide or personal for
you. Right? These were available on Amazon. I don't know if they still are. You stick them on the side of your washing machine, you press them. They
were implemented with MQTT. And what happened is there was a background process that was listening to an MQTT
broker. It was just a procurement process business system and created a new order for that customer using and
what was published in that message is their Amazon ID and it was you know used their Amazon account to send them more
personal anyway they are there out there these smart buttons you can get them you can buy them we're going to implement
something similar right now in a very rudimentary way right um so that's what we're going to do here and we're going
to publish by the way to this gives me a chance to talk about MQTT brokers you might be saying Where are these MQTT
brokers? You can implement your own, right? MQTT is an open protocol. I can
execute a broker. I run a broker on a machine in my house here, but there's a bunch of free usable brokers on the
internet that you can use, right? We're going to look at one now. I'm going to publish to one now. And a broker, it
just has a URL and we use the MQTT protocol to connect to it. And look, there's my MQTT broker here. Let me just
make this a little bit bigger. All right. So, uh, Mosquito, right? Um,
I think they're owned by IBM. Um, they have a broker called at this that's the
essentially the the host name, uh, using DNS that resolves to an IP address, by
the way, and that's what that's what's used to resolve to an IP address. Test.mos.org.
Right? If I go to this, I'll show you what I mean. Right? So, this is a free broker that be can that can be used by
anybody. And I'm just saying that. Just remember that when you're using it. There you go. Right. I'm just going to
it. If I hit it with a HTTP request, this is the web page for it. This is a test host. It's publicly available.
Eclipse MQTT server broker, right? Very lightweight. So again, you can go to test.mmos.org and there's plenty of nice
links here. And it shows you MQTT, by the way, it is a protocol. It has a
well-known port and 1883 is the generally well-known port for MQTT
unencrypted unauthenticated. Maybe next week of time I'll talk about
we can secure MQTT can be done securely a little bit more securely with encryption and authentication using
certificates. We're not doing that right now. So, we don't really need to because the data we're transmitting is fairly basic and it's it it it doesn't we don't
need that kind of security right now for this example. But that's look that's the
broker I'm going to use. That's the port, right? 1883. That says it there, right? That's my unencrypted
unauthenticated broker, right? Um and that's the topic. Look, so this is my Python program. I'm importing, and
you'll do this in the lab. So, I've installed the MQTT library onto my Raspberry Pi into my virtual onto my
Raspberry Pi and I'm just going to send this is the message. This is the payload I want to send, right? Hello HDIP
compsite 2025, right? So, what I want to do and then uh a new line and then a
button press event has occurred. I'm just going to this is my string. It's just a string. This could be JavaScript
object notation if I want. Uh it could be XML if I want. And then what I do is
I create a client here using the MQTT object that I'm getting from the library here, right? Um I'm going to create a
client object. And here's look remember I talked about the protocol. I'm going to connect to the protocol. I'm going to
connect to the broker. So client connect. I'm going to create a connection to that broker on the port
that I specified. And that 60 just means like I'm going to leave it I think 60 seconds to respond. Right? And then this
client loop start, right? This starts the client loop in the back in a background thread. So it starts another
process in the background that checks for MQTT messages or events. Okay, so
this is just something you do to kick it off. Now what I do here is look um I'm
going to define a function called publish message. And all this is going
to all this function does is just I'm going to use it to um publish I'm going
to use it to publish a message right and this is my message to a particular topic on that broker. So look see this. So
this is my publish message uh function. It's going to use the MQTT client and it
will call the publish method. And the publish message takes two arguments. It
takes well it takes it can take more than that. I can take a QoS as well, but we'll leave that out for now. And it's
just going to publish to this topic for/fx swatchforce. And it's going to
publish the message here, right? And that's it. I haven't specified a quality
of service. Remember I talked about 0, one or true. So by default, it will always go zero. It'll fire and forget.
And down here, look down in my main method here. Um, all I'm going to do is while true, forever and ever, I'm going
to check my sens here. Look, I'm importing my sensad ob. I'm creating a sensad object here. I'm checking the
joystick for events. And if the event action, if the joystick is pressed like
a button, right? And the event direction is middle as in I'm just pressing down on my ras on my joystick. I'm going to
publish call the publish message function here, which publishes just a
string to my topic there. That just describes how it works. I'm going to just go to sleep for tenth of a second.
All right. Um, and it's just going to keep on doing this. Just going to keep on checking for press events on the
joystick, mimicking the pressing of a button. If it's pressed, it'll publish the message. That's what the program
does. So, I'm going to put I haven't put it up yet, but I will put up this code. It's very simple code for MQTT, but it
just shows you that's all the code I need to send an MQTT message to create an eventdriven thing. When I run this on
my Raspberry Pi, every time I press the button, the joystick button on my Sense app, it's going to send a message to
this broker to this topic. It's going to publish a message onto that. Right. So, that's what I'm going to do now. So,
let's run this. Okay. I'm going to open up um open up this in my integrated
terminal. Hopefully, it'll start my virtual environment. Yes, it does. And now, what I'm going to do is just Python
and what did I call it? mqtt button
py. Right, let's see if that works.
Yep. So, if it works right now, what I'm going to do here is just want to press the button.
And then you see a message is published. It just says it's just printing it to the console as well as publishing it.
And it's just telling me here that it's published uh to the broker. So, that's great. So now I have I'm pressing this
button. Every time I press the button, it publishes a message to the broker. So that broker is this
cloud service, right? That's right. That that mosquito test.mmos.org
uh service. Uh where is it? There it is. This one here. It's publishing up to there on port 1883 using MQTT. Right
now, how do I know it is? Well, let's just open. Let's subscribe to it. So I'm
publishing. Every time I press a button, I'm publishing. Now I'm subscribing. Now I'm going to use another um I'm going to
create a new terminal here. Okay. Um another terminal here. And I'm going to subscribe to this um
um I'm going to subscribe to this uh topic. Okay. Now I'm doing it on the
Raspberry Pi as well, but I could be doing this on my desktop. You could be doing it if you have MQTT installed and
you're watching this in real time. You can do this yourself at home and you can get this uh you can access this. So, I'm
going to use because I've installed the Mosquito library um onto the Mosquito
package onto my Raspberry Pi. I can use mosquito sub and I'm going to paste in a command here, but I'm going to change
I'm taking it from this week's lab, but I'm going to change it. So, what I'm saying here, I'm using the mosquito sub
executable here. The host I want to connect to is test.mmos.org. That's my broker, right? That H option
here, uh, -H, I give it the broker I want to connect to, right? So, it's
test.mmos.org. And then the dash t is the topic I want to test to. So, look, remember, look,
there's the topic, isn't it? So, that's the topic my program, right, that's running on my Raspberry Pi is connecting
to. So, I'm going to subscribe to that topic. Okay, let's do it here.
So, I'm just going to paste that in here. Now,
so now it's running. Now, I know that doesn't look amazing, but it is in the
background. What's happening happened here is that mosquitoes of this executable, it's created a connection to
this broker, another connection. It's subscribed essentially, it's created a connection and it's subscribed to this
topic on this broker, right? So, anytime any message is published to this broker
or to this broker to this topic, it should appear here. Let's let's see if
that works because if it works, look, my Python program is still running here. If that works, this should every time I
press the button. There you go. Now, I know that doesn't look amazing, but it's actually
subscribed. And to kind of show you, I think I have in my terminal here, are we connected in here? Yep. Let's paste in.
Let's do the same thing here. Um, let's subscribe from this uh session
here as well. Right. So, and this just shows you, right? I have one subscription at the moment. Right? Let's
create another subscription here. Boom. Right. There's another subscription. Okay. This is look a completely
different terminal. This could be running by the way on a completely different computer some anywhere in the world. Once it's connected to the
internet and we can see the broker and I've specified the right topic, every
time I press this, boom. See, look. So now I have two subscriptions and every
time I publish that button press event, both of those subscriptions go do it. I
could have there could be 10,000 subscriptions out there and every time I press that, they will receive that
message. Right? So that's using the broker, the free broker that's there.
And just to show you um just to be aware that that broker that we're using, I'm just going to come out of that now.
That's the broker, but I can subscri subscribe to any topic at all. Let's just pick a topic for instance, and just
see if anybody is subscribing. Remember I talked about the wild card. Let's just see if anybody's subscribing to some
topic, you know, so anything for slash test. Um see if there's anything coming
up there. Yep. I don't know who that is. I don't know where it's coming from. And
the reason I'm showing you this is that just be aware that these brokers, they're free, they're open, and anything
you publish up there, right? If you're using it in projects, anything you publish up there, if you use the unencrypted
open broker, anybody can see the data. More importantly, if you're publishing command data that can control something
important and they can see that too and they can also publish it to it as they can try to publish to that topic, too.
So this I don't know what that data is but just to show you uh let's just see if we can see everything. So if I in the
topic if I just use the overall wild card which is the dollar or whatever that kind of sign is there the sharp
sign. Let's just see. Look now look at all that. I better stop that before my
computer. This is all different this is all different publishers all around the
world. God knows where they are publishing to this free and open broker. So this these mosquito this mosquito
broker and it's not the only free broker that's up there um it these are
generally used for education like we are doing are testing right um testing
devices so you can see the different devices the different messages that are people are publishing look IP addresses
there um you can see sensor data there look um and if I was kind of wanted to
try something dodgy I could actually push all this data out to a file. Have a
look for what we call command data. You'll see what command data I'll talk about it in the lab. Command data is
where I send a publish a message that I want some other subscriber to actuate on
that message as in it takes the message and does something. For instance, turn the LEDs on on the on the Raspberry Pi,
turn it device on or off. So if I wanted to, I could go through here and find,
look, there's MAC address stuff there. And I could look for sensitive data or command data. Then what I could try and
do is I take that topic and I could try and publish to that topic myself to mess
around with it. Not that I would. The reason I'm telling you this is that just be wary that everything you publish to
that mosquito broker is visible like this to everybody else. So it's okay for
publishing just educational test data and stuff like that. But if it was something important I just be uh aware
of it. So you can see there that looks kind of you know that's information about a machine. You see that look um
user login. There's user login ID there. Um what other data is there? Um anything
sensitive? Uh yeah it's about some device that's industry IoT there going on. Um hopefully that's just test. test
data are not real data but I could go in there and just kind of you know um try
and get some interesting information that I can use for some other reason. There you go. But that's uh subscri
subscribing and if I wanted to write just to show you here's another program here and let's open this in integrated
terminal. If I want to write a program here that subscribes a Python program that subscribes to a particular topic.
There's my broker there's my port. If I want to subscribe to fxwalsh.est test here. Um, and what I want to do here is
that I want to subscribe to this topic. And every time a message is published to this topic, I'm going this what this
program does. Um, I'll just open it up and I'll put it up on the website. Um, I
want it to just fl uh flick the lights through a random set of colors. So, what
I can do here to do that is that I define I'm just going to highlight this code here. Make it a bit bigger.
Uh maybe not get rid of it. That was the wrong thing to do. Um control zed. This
onssage um this onssage function is what we call
the call back function when a message is received. So uh you'll see down here I create just like the last program I
create a client connection to my MQTT broker. And then look at this on
connect. I can define a me a a callback function once the connection is created. it just confirms that it's connected to
the broker. But this one here on message right. So when I connect to a broker on a port and then I can define this on
message um to uh call this message right every time
a message is received on a particular topic. Then you see here then you can
see here I subscribe my client to this topic which is FX Walsh test. If I scrub
subscribe to that topic, then what I can do here, you see the on message here. Every time I receive a message uh that's
sent that's published on this topic, I'm going to execute this function. And look
what the function does. It just prints message received. And then what it does is that just to kind of interact with
something, actuate something, it just goes through a bunch of different colors on my uh on my um
on my sense hat here. So if I do that, I'm just going to run it very quickly, but you can try this yourselves at home.
Maybe change the topic or something like that. That's not my name.
If I run that, yep, it's running. It's connected to the broker. Hopefully, the other program is still running in the
background. Now, if I click on my button here, you can see that, and I don't know if you can see it. I'm going to hold it
up to the screen there. every time I press the button. I know it's all happening on the same device. But what
could happen here is that that program, you see that MQTT sens Python program that I'm just running here, you could
run the exact same program on your Raspberry Pi right now at home if you're watching this live, right? If you ran it
on your Python program on your Raspberry Pi, this Python program on your Raspberry Pi at home, every time I press
the button here where I am, it would cause your LEDs on your Sensat to start
flashing. Right? That's event driven programming. It's an event driven
design. So every time I press a button, right, if there was 20 of you out there with the this program, the same program
running on your Raspberry Pi, because you're subscribed to the same topic as I'm publishing to from pressing the
button here, my LED your LEDs would flash. Right? This is very very much
similar to how in online games how events are distributed you know in kind of games like um
uh Soldier of Fortune and things like that where an event happens like a bullet is fired or something happens that all the different players you know
their their program they they're h it responds accordingly an event occur is
published and everything that's subscribed to that event receives it. So that's MQTT and an example of MQTT. So
let me go back to the slide deck there. I think we're finished. Actually, we're actually run over a little bit today.
Sorry about that. But that's um that's MQTT. Um hopefully
you will see in the lab when you do the labs, that's what you're going to that's what's going to be covered. You're going
to build um an MQTT application um that runs on your Raspberry Pi that
publishes. You're also going to build one that subscribes to that that published data. And you can see how it all works and how it hangs together.
You're also going to build uh you're going to look at different types of MQTT
messages. You're going to look at telemetry, which is typically uses QoS0. you're going to look at, excuse me,
command uh type data, which would usually be either QoS1 or QoS2, where you send a command for something to
happen. You want to be sure that that's message is published. Um, so you might use QoS1 for that. And then you might
use uh like I said, the last will of testament, you might use uh that to indicate whether a device is online or
offline. So the this what I want you to do now is like think about how you might apply that kind of thing. I what I've
just demoed you there is this kind of a powerful kind of way of doing things where I press a button here it creates
an event um and I can write a program or there's can be various programs or I can do any
kind of functionality I can write a program in a different programming language that subscribes to that event and does something accordingly. So I
press this button here. As I said, I have buttons. I done something similar like that in the house where I press a
button here and it causes other devices in my house to do stuff. For instance,
um it causes my uh a button that when I press it, it causes my internet to
essentially switch off and isolate the whole house from the internet. That kind of thing. So look, I'm going
to talk about we're going to move on next time to talk about building on top of this type of idea uh where we look at
IoT platforms and as well I want to talk about different types of ways we can apply this to kind of create more
interesting applications. But in the meantime, I'm going to sign off there for now. I went a bit over today. Apologies about that. Didn't realize
time getting away from us. But if you have any questions about any of this, of course, uh Slack is the place. I'm going
to be around for a couple of minutes now as well. So, um, thanks for joining me today if you're joining it live.